docs: add multi-language blob operations quickstart (BEDU-178) (#3549)
MystenLabs/walrus: docs/content/blob-operations-quickstart.mdx

## Before you begin

No API key is required. The public Walrus aggregator and publisher endpoints are open.

Set the endpoints you use. The examples below use the Testnet endpoints from the [Network Reference](/docs/network-reference#aggregators-and-publishers):

```sh
# Reads go to an aggregator; writes go to a publisher.
export AGGREGATOR=https://aggregator.walrus-testnet.walrus.space
export PUBLISHER=https://publisher.walrus-testnet.walrus.space
```

Each surface has its own prerequisites:

- **CLI:** Install and configure the `walrus` client. See [Getting Started](/docs/getting-started).
- **HTTP API:** Any HTTP client, such as `curl`.
- **Python:** Install the requests library with `pip install requests`.

:::caution Public endpoint limits

Public aggregators and publishers limit requests to 10 MiB, and Walrus does not provide a public unauthenticated publisher on Mainnet. For larger blobs or production Mainnet writes, run your own publisher, use an upload relay, or drive the CLI. See the [Mainnet Publisher Production Guide](/docs/operator-guide/publishers/mainnet-production-guide).

> :::

Reviewer: This section should follow the Prerequisites format that is used elsewhere on the docs. We only use "Before you begin" in one other section on the Getting Started page, which IMO is fine for that specific guide, but I think we should remain consistent with our mode widely used format.

> :::

Reviewer: ````suggestion
<div className="outlined-tabs">

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="prereq" label="Prerequisites">

- [x] No API key required. The public Walrus aggregator and publisher endpoints are open.
- [x] Set the endpoints you want to use. The examples below use the Testnet endpoints from the [Network Reference](/docs/network-reference#aggregators-and-publishers):

```sh
  export AGGREGATOR=https://aggregator.walrus-testnet.walrus.space
  export PUBLISHER=https://publisher.walrus-testnet.walrus.space
```

- [x] Choose a surface and complete the necessary setup:
  - **CLI:** Install and configure the `walrus` client. See [Getting Started](/docs/getting-started).
  - **HTTP API:** Any HTTP client, such as `curl`.
  - **Python:** Install the requests library with `pip install requests`.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

</div>

:::caution Public endpoint limits
Public aggregators and publishers limit requests to 10 MiB, and Walrus does not provide a public unauthenticated publisher on Mainnet. For larger blobs or production Mainnet writes, run your own publisher, use an upload relay, or drive the CLI. See the [Mainnet Publisher Production Guide](/docs/operator-guide/publishers/mainnet-production-guide).
:::
````

## Store a blob

> Store a file for a number of epochs. The store returns a blob ID that you use to read the blob back.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Store a file for a number of epochs. The store returns a blob ID.
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="CLI" value="cli">

```sh
$ walrus store ./report.pdf --epochs 5
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="HTTP API" value="http">

```sh
$ curl -X PUT "$PUBLISHER/v1/blobs?epochs=5" --upload-file ./report.pdf
```

> The response is JSON. A first-time store returns a `newlyCreated` object, and a store of a blob that already exists returns an `alreadyCertified` object. The blob ID is in both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The HTTP API returns JSON. A first-time store returns a `newlyCreated` object, and a store of a blob that already exists returns an `alreadyCertified` object. The blob ID is in both.
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="Python" value="python">

```python
import requests

PUBLISHER = "https://publisher.walrus-testnet.walrus.space"

def store_blob(data: bytes, epochs: int = 5) -> str:
    response = requests.put(
        f"{PUBLISHER}/v1/blobs",
        params={"epochs": epochs},
        data=data,
    )
    response.raise_for_status()
    result = response.json()

    # A first-time store returns "newlyCreated"; an existing blob returns
    # "alreadyCertified". The blob ID is available in both cases.
    if "newlyCreated" in result:
        return result["newlyCreated"]["blobObject"]["blobId"]
    return result["alreadyCertified"]["blobId"]

with open("report.pdf", "rb") as file:
    blob_id = store_blob(file.read())
print(f"stored blob {blob_id}")
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Read a blob

> Read a blob back by its blob ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read a blob using its blob ID.
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="CLI" value="cli">

```sh
$ walrus read <BLOB_ID> --out ./report.pdf
```

> Without `--out`, the blob is written to standard output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without the flag `--out`, the blob is written to standard output.
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="HTTP API" value="http">

```sh
$ curl "$AGGREGATOR/v1/blobs/<BLOB_ID>" -o ./report.pdf
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="Python" value="python">

```python
import requests

AGGREGATOR = "https://aggregator.walrus-testnet.walrus.space"

def read_blob(blob_id: str) -> bytes:
    response = requests.get(f"{AGGREGATOR}/v1/blobs/{blob_id}")
    response.raise_for_status()
    return response.content

data = read_blob(blob_id)
with open("report.pdf", "wb") as file:
    file.write(data)
print(f"read {len(data)} bytes")
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Check a blob's status

> Check whether a blob is available and how it is registered onchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check whether a blob is available and its registered onchain information.
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem label="CLI" value="cli">

```sh
$ walrus blob-status --blob-id <BLOB_ID>
```

> The CLI reports the blob's certification status and end epoch from its Sui object. See [Reading blobs](/docs/walrus-client/reading-blobs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CLI reports the blob's certification status and end epoch from its Sui object. See [Reading blobs](/docs/walrus-client/reading-blobs) to learn more about certification status and Sui objects.
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="HTTP API" value="http">

The aggregator serves reads, so a successful `GET` confirms the blob is available. A `200` response means the blob is readable; a `404` means it is not available on that aggregator.

```sh
$ curl -o /dev/null -s -w "%{http_code}\n" "$AGGREGATOR/v1/blobs/<BLOB_ID>"
```

For the onchain certification status and end epoch, use the CLI `blob-status` command.

</TabItem>
<TabItem label="Python" value="python">

```python
import requests

AGGREGATOR = "https://aggregator.walrus-testnet.walrus.space"

def is_available(blob_id: str) -> bool:
    response = requests.get(f"{AGGREGATOR}/v1/blobs/{blob_id}")
    return response.status_code == 200

print("available" if is_available(blob_id) else "not available")
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> ## Put it together in Python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Full Python example
```

        return result["newlyCreated"]["blobObject"]["blobId"]
    return result["alreadyCertified"]["blobId"]

def read_blob(blob_id: str) -> bytes:
    response = requests.get(f"{AGGREGATOR}/v1/blobs/{blob_id}")
    response.raise_for_status()
    return response.content

if __name__ == "__main__":
    original = os.urandom(1024)
    blob_id = store_blob(original)
    print(f"stored blob {blob_id}")

    downloaded = read_blob(blob_id)
    assert downloaded == original, "round trip mismatch"
    print(f"read {len(downloaded)} bytes back, round trip verified")
```

For more Python examples, including driving the CLI through its JSON interface and tracking Walrus events, see [Using Walrus with Python](/docs/examples/python).

## Next steps

- Store blobs with the CLI: [Store blobs with the Walrus client](/docs/walrus-client/storing-blobs)
- Use the HTTP API in depth: [Storing blobs with the HTTP API](/docs/http-api/storing-blobs) and [Reading blobs with the HTTP API](/docs/http-api/reading-blobs)
- Run a publisher that pays for storage on behalf of your users: [Mainnet Publisher Production Guide](/docs/operator-guide/publishers/mainnet-production-guide)

> - Canonical endpoints and IDs: [Network Reference](/docs/network-reference)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## References

- Store blobs with the CLI: [Store blobs with the Walrus client](/docs/walrus-client/storing-blobs)
- Use the HTTP API in depth: [Storing blobs with the HTTP API](/docs/http-api/storing-blobs) and [Reading blobs with the HTTP API](/docs/http-api/reading-blobs)
- Run a publisher that pays for storage on behalf of your users: [Mainnet Publisher Production Guide](/docs/operator-guide/publishers/mainnet-production-guide)
- Canonical endpoints and IDs: [Network Reference](/docs/network-reference)
```
